# Welcome to the QIR Specification

The QIR specification is an effort of the [QIR
Alliance](https://qir-alliance.org/). It defines how to represent quantum
programs within the LLVM IR. For more information about this project, please see
[Scope.md](Scope.md). To learn more about LLVM, please see
[Resources.md](Resources.md).

If you are interested in compiler tools and projects leveraging QIR, please take
a look at our other
[repositories](https://github.com/qir-alliance#contributing).

## Contributing

There are many ways in which you can contribute to this effort, whether with a
contribution to the specification itself or in the form of tools and
documentation to facilitate working with QIR.

### Asking and Answering Questions

Have a question? This repository is a great place to ask questions about QIR and
the available tools to work with it. Your question will serve as a resource to
others searching for help. Please file an issue to ask your question
[here](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/issues/new).

Or maybe you have figured out how that hard-to-understand concept works? Share
your knowledge! If you are interested in contributing to the documentation
around QIR and its tools, please follow the standard development process on the
respective repository to improve the materials.

### Reporting and Commenting on Issues

Have you identified an issue or modification that would benefit the community?
We want to hear about it! If you have feedback about the content in this
repository, please let us know by filing a [new
issue](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/issues/new)!

As for any active effort, there are always many ways in which we hope to evolve
and improve the specification and tools. We encourage you to look at the list of
currently [open issues](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/issues) to
share your ideas and expertise.

### Contributing to the Specification

Contributions to the specification require you to agree to a [Contributor
License Agreement (CLA)](Contributor_License_Agreement.md), declaring that you
have the right to, and actually do, grant us the rights to use your
contribution. A CLA bot will automatically add a comment with instructions for
how to do so when contributing to this repository for the first time. If you
have any questions or would like to revoke your consent, please contact
[qiralliance@mail.com](mailto:qiralliance@mail.com).

For more information about the development process for specifications under the
QIR Alliance, please see the governance policy available
[here](https://github.com/qir-alliance/.github/blob/main/Governance.md).

### Contributing an Implementation

We welcome code contributions in the form of adding new repositories under the
QIR Alliance or contributing to existing efforts. For more information about how
to contribute code and/or let people know about related work, please take a look
[here](https://github.com/qir-alliance#contributing).

And last but not least:

**Thank You!** <br/>
Your contributions to open source, large or small, make great projects like this
possible. Thank you for taking the time to contribute.

## Code of Conduct

This project has adopted the community specification [Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/qir-alliance/.github/blob/main/Code_of_Conduct.md#contributor-covenant-code-of-conduct).
Please contact [qiralliance@mail.com](mailto:qiralliance@mail.com) for Code of
Conduct issues or inquiries.
